8
Software testing
Objectives
The objective of this chapter is to introduce software testing and
software testing processes. When you have read the chapter, you will:
(cid:2) understand the stages of testing from testing, during development
to acceptance testing by system customers;
(cid:2) have been introduced to techniques that help you choose test
cases that are geared to discovering program defects;
(cid:2) understand test-first development, where you design tests before
writing code and run these tests automatically;
(cid:2) know the important differences between component, system,
andrelease testing and be aware of user testing processes and
techniques.
Contents
8.1 Development testing
8.2 Test-driven development
8.3 Release testing
8.4 User testing

206 Chapter 8 (cid:2) Software testing
Testing is intended to show that a program does what it is intended to do and to dis-
cover program defects before it is put into use. When you test software, you execute
a program using artificial data. You check the results of the test run for errors, anom-
alies, or information about the program’s non-functional attributes.
The testing process has two distinct goals:
1. To demonstrate to the developer and the customer that the software meets its
requirements. For custom software, this means that there should be at least one
test for every requirement in the requirements document. For generic software
products, it means that there should be tests for all of the system features, plus
combinations of these features, that will be incorporated in the product release.
2. To discover situations in which the behavior of the software is incorrect, unde-
sirable, or does not conform to its specification. These are a consequence of
software defects. Defect testing is concerned with rooting out undesirable sys-
tem behavior such as system crashes, unwanted interactions with other systems,
incorrect computations, and data corruption.
The first goal leads to validation testing, where you expect the system to perform
correctly using a given set of test cases that reflect the system’s expected use. The
second goal leads to defect testing, where the test cases are designed to expose
defects. The test cases in defect testing can be deliberately obscure and need not
reflect how the system is normally used. Of course, there is no definite boundary
between these two approaches to testing. During validation testing, you will find
defects in the system; during defect testing, some of the tests will show that the pro-
gram meets its requirements.
The diagram shown in Figure 8.1 may help to explain the differences between
validation testing and defect testing. Think of the system being tested as a black
box. The system accepts inputs from some input set I and generates outputs in an
output set O. Some of the outputs will be erroneous. These are the outputs in set O
e
that are generated by the system in response to inputs in the set I . The priority in
e
defect testing is to find those inputs in the set I because these reveal problems with
e
the system. Validation testing involves testing with correct inputs that are outside I .
e
These stimulate the system to generate the expected correct outputs.
Testing cannot demonstrate that the software is free of defects or that it will
behave as specified in every circumstance. It is always possible that a test that you
have overlooked could discover further problems with the system. As Edsger
Dijkstra, an early contributor to the development of software engineering, eloquently
stated (Dijkstra et al., 1972):
Testing can only show the presence of errors, not their absence
Testing is part of a broader process of software verification and validation (V & V).
Verification and validation are not the same thing, although they are often confused.

Chapter 8 (cid:2) Software testing 207
Input Test Data I Inputs Causing
e
Anomalous
Behavior
System
Figure 8.1 An Output Test Results O e Outputs Which Reveal
input-output model the Presence of
of program testing Defects
Barry Boehm, a pioneer of software engineering, succinctly expressed the difference
between them (Boehm, 1979):
(cid:2) ‘Validation: Are we building the right product?’
(cid:2) ‘Verification: Are we building the product right?’
Verification and validation processes are concerned with checking that software
being developed meets its specification and delivers the functionality expected by the
people paying for the software. These checking processes start as soon as requirements
become available and continue through all stages of the development process.
The aim of verification is to check that the software meets its stated functional and
non-functional requirements. Validation, however, is a more general process. The aim
of validation is to ensure that the software meets the customer’s expectations. It goes
beyond simply checking conformance with the specification to demonstrating that the
software does what the customer expects it to do. Validation is essential because, as
I discussed in Chapter 4, requirements specifications do not always reflect the real
wishes or needs of system customers and users.
The ultimate goal of verification and validation processes is to establish confi-
dence that the software system is ‘fit for purpose’. This means that the system must
be good enough for its intended use. The level of required confidence depends on the
system’s purpose, the expectations of the system users, and the current marketing
environment for the system:
1. Software purpose The more critical the software, the more important that it is
reliable. For example, the level of confidence required for software used to con-
trol a safety-critical system is much higher than that required for a prototype
that has been developed to demonstrate new product ideas.
2. User expectationsBecause of their experiences with buggy, unreliable software,
many users have low expectations of software quality. They are not surprised
when their software fails. When a new system is installed, users may tolerate

208 Chapter 8 (cid:2) Software testing
Inspections
Requirements Software UML Design Database
Program
Specification Architecture Models Schemas
System
Testing
Prototype
failures because the benefits of use outweigh the costs of failure recovery.
Figure 8.2 Inspections
Inthese situations, you may not need to devote as much time to testing the soft-
and testing
ware. However, as software matures, users expect it to become more reliable so
more thorough testing of later versions may be required.
3. Marketing environment When a system is marketed, the sellers of the system
must take into account competing products, the price that customers are willing
to pay for a system, and the required schedule for delivering that system. In a
competitive environment, a software company may decide to release a program
before it has been fully tested and debugged because they want to be the first
into the market. If a software product is very cheap, users may be willing to tol-
erate a lower level of reliability.
As well as software testing, the verification and validation process may involve
software inspections and reviews. Inspections and reviews analyze and check the
system requirements, design models, the program source code, and even proposed
system tests. These are so-called ‘static’ V & V techniques in which you don’t need
to execute the software to verify it. Figure 8.2 shows that software inspections and
testing support V & V at different stages in the software process. The arrows indicate
the stages in the process where the techniques may be used.
Inspections mostly focus on the source code of a system but any readable repre-
sentation of the software, such as its requirements or a design model, can be
inspected. When you inspect a system, you use knowledge of the system, its applica-
tion domain, and the programming or modeling language to discover errors.
There are three advantages of software inspection over testing:
1. During testing, errors can mask (hide) other errors. When an error leads to
unexpected outputs, you can never be sure if later output anomalies are due to
a new error or are side effects of the original error. Because inspection is a
static process, you don’t have to be concerned with interactions between
errors. Consequently, a single inspection session can discover many errors in a
system.

Chapter 8 (cid:2) Software testing 209
Test planning
Test planning is concerned with scheduling and resourcing all of the activities in the testing process. It involves
defining the testing process, taking into account the people and the time available. Usually, a test plan will be
created, which defines what is to be tested, the predicted testing schedule, and how tests will be recorded. For
critical systems, the test plan may also include details of the tests to be run on the software.
http://www.SoftwareEngineering-9.com/Web/Testing/Planning.html
2. Incomplete versions of a system can be inspected without additional costs. If
a program is incomplete, then you need to develop specialized test harnesses
to test the parts that are available. This obviously adds to the system develop-
ment costs.
3. As well as searching for program defects, an inspection can also consider
broader quality attributes of a program, such as compliance with standards,
portability, and maintainability. You can look for inefficiencies, inappropriate
algorithms, and poor programming style that could make the system difficult to
maintain and update.
Program inspections are an old idea and there have been several studies and
experiments that have demonstrated that inspections are more effective for defect
discovery than program testing. Fagan (1986) reported that more than 60% of the
errors in a program can be detected using informal program inspections. In the
Cleanroom process (Prowell et al., 1999), it is claimed that more than 90% of defects
can be discovered in program inspections.
However, inspections cannot replace software testing. Inspections are not good
for discovering defects that arise because of unexpected interactions between dif-
ferent parts of a program, timing problems, or problems with system perfor-
mance. Furthermore, especially in small companies or development groups, it can
be difficult and expensive to put together a separate inspection team as all poten-
tial members of the team may also be software developers. I discuss reviews and
inspections in more detail in Chapter 24 (Quality Management). Automated static
analysis, where the source text of a program is automatically analyzed to discover
anomalies, is explained in Chapter 15. In this chapter, I focus on testing and
testing processes.
Figure 8.3is an abstract model of the ‘traditional’ testing process, as used in plan-
driven development. Test cases are specifications of the inputs to the test and the
expected output from the system (the test results), plus a statement of what is being
tested. Test data are the inputs that have been devised to test a system. Test data can
sometimes be generated automatically, but automatic test case generation is impossi-
ble, as people who understand what the system is supposed to do must be involved to
specify the expected test results. However, test execution can be automated. The
expected results are automatically compared with the predicted results so there is no
need for a person to look for errors and anomalies in the test run.

210 Chapter 8 (cid:2) Software testing
Test Test Test Test
Cases Data Results Reports
Design Test Prepare Test Run Program Compare Results
Cases Data with Test Data to Test Cases
Typically, a commercial software system has to go through three stages of testing:
Figure 8.3 A model
ofthe software testing
1. Development testing, where the system is tested during development to discover
process
bugs and defects. System designers and programmers are likely to be involved
in the testing process.
2. Release testing, where a separate testing team tests a complete version of the
system before it is released to users. The aim of release testing is to check that
the system meets the requirements of system stakeholders.
3. User testing, where users or potential users of a system test the system in their
own environment. For software products, the ‘user’ may be an internal market-
ing group who decide if the software can be marketed, released, and sold.
Acceptance testing is one type of user testing where the customer formally tests
a system to decide if it should be accepted from the system supplier or if further
development is required.
In practice, the testing process usually involves a mixture of manual and auto-
mated testing. In manual testing, a tester runs the program with some test data and
compares the results to their expectations. They note and report discrepancies to the
program developers. In automated testing, the tests are encoded in a program that is
run each time the system under development is to be tested. This is usually faster
than manual testing, especially when it involves regression testing—re-running pre-
vious tests to check that changes to the program have not introduced new bugs.
The use of automated testing has increased considerably over the past few years.
However, testing can never be completely automated as automated tests can only
check that a program does what it is supposed to do. It is practically impossible to use
automated testing to test systems that depend on how things look (e.g., a graphical
user interface), or to test that a program does not have unwanted side effects.
8.1 Development testing
Development testing includes all testing activities that are carried out by the team
developing the system. The tester of the software is usually the programmer who
developed that software, although this is not always the case. Some development
processes use programmer/tester pairs (Cusamano and Selby, 1998) where each

8.1 (cid:2) Development testing 211
Debugging
Debugging is the process of fixing errors and problems that have been discovered by testing. Using information
from the program tests, debuggers use their knowledge of the programming language and the intended
outcome of the test to locate and repair the program error. This process is often supported by interactive
debugging tools that provide extra information about program execution.
http://www.SoftwareEngineering-9.com/Web/Testing/Debugging.html
programmer has an associated tester who develops tests and assists with the testing
process. For critical systems, a more formal process may be used, with a separate
testing group within the development team. They are responsible for developing tests
and maintaining detailed records of test results.
During development, testing may be carried out at three levels of granularity:
1. Unit testing, where individual program units or object classes are tested. Unit
testing should focus on testing the functionality of objects or methods.
2. Component testing, where several individual units are integrated to create com-
posite components. Component testing should focus on testing component
interfaces.
3. System testing, where some or all of the components in a system are integrated
and the system is tested as a whole. System testing should focus on testing com-
ponent interactions.
Development testing is primarily a defect testing process, where the aim of testing
is to discover bugs in the software. It is therefore usually interleaved with debugging—
the process of locating problems with the code and changing the program to fix these
problems.
8.1.1 Unit testing
Unit testing is the process of testing program components, such as methods or object
classes. Individual functions or methods are the simplest type of component. Your
tests should be calls to these routines with different input parameters. You can use
the approaches to test case design discussed in Section 8.1.2, to design the function
or method tests.
When you are testing object classes, you should design your tests to provide cov-
erage of all of the features of the object. This means that you should:
• test all operations associated with the object;
• set and check the value of all attributes associated with the object;
• put the object into all possible states. This means that you should simulate all
events that cause a state change.

212 Chapter 8 (cid:2) Software testing
WeatherStation
identifier
reportWeather( )
reportStatus( )
powerSave(instruments)
remoteControl(commands)
reconfigure(commands)
restart(instruments)
Figure 8.4 The weather
shutdown(instruments)
station object interface
Consider, for example, the weather station object from the example that I discussed
in Chapter 7. The interface of this object is shown in Figure 8.4. It has a single attribute,
which is its identifier. This is a constant that is set when the weather station is installed.
You therefore only need a test that checks if it has been properly set up. You need to
define test cases for all of the methods associated with the object such as reportWeather,
reportStatus, etc. Ideally, you should test methods in isolation but, in some cases, some
test sequences are necessary. For example, to test the method that shuts down the
weather station instruments (shutdown), you need to have executed the restart method.
Generalization or inheritance makes object class testing more complicated. You
can’t simply test an operation in the class where it is defined and assume that it will
work as expected in the subclasses that inherit the operation. The operation that is
inherited may make assumptions about other operations and attributes. These may
not be valid in some subclasses that inherit the operation. You therefore have to test
the inherited operation in all of the contexts where it is used.
To test the states of the weather station, you use a state model, such as the one
shown in Figure 7.8 in the previous chapter. Using this model, you can identify
sequences of state transitions that have to be tested and define event sequences to
force these transitions. In principle, you should test every possible state transition
sequence, although in practice this may be too expensive. Examples of state
sequences that should be tested in the weather station include:
→ →
Shutdown Running Shutdown
→ → → →
Configuring Running Testing Transmitting Running
→ → → → →
Running Collecting Running Summarizing Transmitting Running
Whenever possible, you should automate unit testing. In automated unit testing,
you make use of a test automation framework (such as JUnit) to write and run your
program tests. Unit testing frameworks provide generic test classes that you extend
to create specific test cases. They can then run all of the tests that you have imple-
mented and report, often through some GUI, on the success or failure of the tests. An
entire test suite can often be run in a few seconds so it is possible to execute all the
tests every time you make a change to the program.
An automated test has three parts:
1. A setup part, where you initialize the system with the test case, namely the
inputs and expected outputs.

8.1 (cid:2) Development testing 213
2. A call part, where you call the object or method to be tested.
3. An assertion part where you compare the result of the call with the expected
result. If the assertion evaluates to true, the test has been successful; if false,
then it has failed.
Sometimes the object that you are testing has dependencies on other objects that
may not have been written or which slow down the testing process if they are used.
For example, if your object calls a database, this may involve a slow setup process
before it can be used. In these cases, you may decide to use mock objects. Mock
objects are objects with the same interface as the external objects being used that
simulate its functionality. Therefore, a mock object simulating a database may have
only a few data items that are organized in an array. They can therefore be accessed
quickly, without the overheads of calling a database and accessing disks. Similarly,
mock objects can be used to simulate abnormal operation or rare events. For exam-
ple, if your system is intended to take action at certain times of day, your mock
object can simply return those times, irrespective of the actual clock time.
8.1.2 Choosing unit test cases
Testing is expensive and time consuming, so it is important that you choose effective
unit test cases. Effectiveness, in this case, means two things:
1. The test cases should show that, when used as expected, the component that you
are testing does what it is supposed to do.
2. If there are defects in the component, these should be revealed by test cases.
You should therefore write two kinds of test case. The first of these should reflect
normal operation of a program and should show that the component works. For
example, if you are testing a component that creates and initializes a new patient
record, then your test case should show that the record exists in a database and that
its fields have been set as specified. The other kind of test case should be based on
testing experience of where common problems arise. It should use abnormal inputs
to check that these are properly processed and do not crash the component.
I discuss two possible strategies here that can be effective in helping you choose
test cases. These are:
1. Partition testing, where you identify groups of inputs that have common charac-
teristics and should be processed in the same way. You should choose tests from
within each of these groups.
2. Guideline-based testing, where you use testing guidelines to choose test cases.
These guidelines reflect previous experience of the kinds of errors that program-
mers often make when developing components.

214 Chapter 8 (cid:2) Software testing
Input Equivalence Partitions Output Partitions
System
Correct
Outputs
Figure 8.5 Equivalence
partitioning Possible Inputs Possible Outputs
The input data and output results of a program often fall into a number of differ-
ent classes with common characteristics. Examples of these classes are positive
numbers, negative numbers, and menu selections. Programs normally behave in a
comparable way for all members of a class. That is, if you test a program that does a
computation and requires two positive numbers, then you would expect the program
to behave in the same way for all positive numbers.
Because of this equivalent behavior, these classes are sometimes called equiva-
lence partitions or domains (Bezier, 1990). One systematic approach to test case
design is based on identifying all input and output partitions for a system or compo-
nent. Test cases are designed so that the inputs or outputs lie within these partitions.
Partition testing can be used to design test cases for both systems and components.
In Figure 8.5, the large shaded ellipse on the left represents the set of all possible
inputs to the program that is being tested. The smaller unshaded ellipses represent
equivalence partitions. A program being tested should process all of the members of
an input equivalence partitions in the same way. Output equivalence partitions are
partitions within which all of the outputs have something in common. Sometimes
there is a 1:1 mapping between input and output equivalence partitions. However,
this is not always the case; you may need to define a separate input equivalence par-
tition, where the only common characteristic of the inputs is that they generate out-
puts within the same output partition. The shaded area in the left ellipse represents
inputs that are invalid. The shaded area in the right ellipse represents exceptions that
may occur (i.e., responses to invalid inputs).
Once you have identified a set of partitions, you choose test cases from each of
these partitions. A good rule of thumb for test case selection is to choose test cases
on the boundaries of the partitions, plus cases close to the midpoint of the partition.
The reason for this is that designers and programmers tend to consider typical values
of inputs when developing a system. You test these by choosing the midpoint of the
partition. Boundary values are often atypical (e.g., zero may behave differently from
other non-negative numbers) so are sometimes overlooked by developers. Program
failures often occur when processing these atypical values.

8.1 (cid:2) Development testing 215
3 11
4 7 10
Less than 4 Between 4 and 10 More than 10
Number of Input Values
9999 100000
10000 50000 99999
Less than 10000 Between 10000 and 99999 More than 99999
Figure 8.6 Equivalence
partitions Input Values
You identify partitions by using the program specification or user documentation
and from experience where you predict the classes of input value that are likely to
detect errors. For example, say a program specification states that the program
accepts 4 to 8 inputs which are five-digit integers greater than 10,000. You use this
information to identify the input partitions and possible test input values. These are
shown in Figure 8.6.
When you use the specification of a system to identify equivalence partitions, this
is called ‘black-box testing’. Here, you don’t need any knowledge of how the system
works. However, it may be helpful to supplement the black-box tests with ‘white-
box testing’, where you look at the code of the program to find other possible tests.
For example, your code may include exceptions to handle incorrect inputs. You can
use this knowledge to identify ‘exception partitions’—different ranges where the
same exception handling should be applied.
Equivalence partitioning is an effective approach to testing because it helps
account for errors that programmers often make when processing inputs at the edges
of partitions. You can also use testing guidelines to help choose test cases.
Guidelines encapsulate knowledge of what kinds of test cases are effective for dis-
covering errors. For example, when you are testing programs with sequences, arrays,
or lists, guidelines that could help reveal defects include:
1. Test software with sequences that have only a single value. Programmers natu-
rally think of sequences as made up of several values and sometimes they embed
this assumption in their programs. Consequently, if presented with a single-
value sequence, a program may not work properly.
2. Use different sequences of different sizes in different tests. This decreases the
chances that a program with defects will accidentally produce a correct output
because of some accidental characteristics of the input.
3. Derive tests so that the first, middle, and last elements of the sequence are
accessed. This approach is reveals problems at partition boundaries.

216 Chapter 8 (cid:2) Software testing
Path testing
Path testing is a testing strategy that aims to exercise every independent execution path through a component
or program. If every independent path is executed, then all statements in the component must have been
executed at least once. All conditional statements are tested for both true and false cases. In an object-oriented
development process, path testing may be used when testing the methods associated with objects.
http://www.SoftwareEngineering-9.com/Web/Testing/PathTest.html
Whittaker’s book (2002) includes many examples of guidelines that can be used
in test case design. Some of the most general guidelines that he suggests are:
(cid:2) Choose inputs that force the system to generate all error messages;
(cid:2) Design inputs that cause input buffers to overflow;
(cid:2) Repeat the same input or series of inputs numerous times;
(cid:2) Force invalid outputs to be generated;
(cid:2) Force computation results to be too large or too small.
As you gain experience with testing, you can develop your own guidelines about
how to choose effective test cases. I give more examples of testing guidelines in the
next section of this chapter.
8.1.3 Component testing
Software components are often composite components that are made up of several
interacting objects. For example, in the weather station system, the reconfiguration
component includes objects that deal with each aspect of the reconfiguration. You
access the functionality of these objects through the defined component interface.
Testing composite components should therefore focus on showing that the compo-
nent interface behaves according to its specification. You can assume that unit tests
on the individual objects within the component have been completed.
Figure 8.7illustrates the idea of component interface testing. Assume that compo-
nents A, B, and C have been integrated to create a larger component or subsystem.
The test cases are not applied to the individual components but rather to the interface
of the composite component created by combining these components. Interface errors
in the composite component may not be detectable by testing the individual objects
because these errors result from interactions between the objects in the component.
There are different types of interface between program components and, conse-
quently, different types of interface error that can occur:
1. Parameter interfacesThese are interfaces in which data or sometimes function
references are passed from one component to another. Methods in an object
have a parameter interface.

8.1 (cid:2) Development testing 217
Test Cases
A B
C
Figure 8.7 Interface
testing
2. Shared memory interfaces These are interfaces in which a block of memory is
shared between components. Data is placed in the memory by one subsystem
and retrieved from there by other sub-systems. This type of interface is often
used in embedded systems, where sensors create data that is retrieved and
processed by other system components.
3. Procedural interfaces These are interfaces in which one component encapsu-
lates a set of procedures that can be called by other components. Objects and
reusable components have this form of interface.
4. Message passing interfaces These are interfaces in which one component
requests a service from another component by passing a message to it. A return
message includes the results of executing the service. Some object-oriented sys-
tems have this form of interface, as do client–server systems.
Interface errors are one of the most common forms of error in complex systems
(Lutz, 1993). These errors fall into three classes:
(cid:2) Interface misuseA calling component calls some other component and makes an
error in the use of its interface. This type of error is common with parameter inter-
faces, where parameters may be of the wrong type or be passed in the wrong
order, or the wrong number of parameters may be passed.
(cid:2) Interface misunderstanding A calling component misunderstands the specifica-
tion of the interface of the called component and makes assumptions about its
behavior. The called component does not behave as expected which then causes
unexpected behavior in the calling component. For example, a binary search
method may be called with a parameter that is an unordered array. The search
would then fail.
(cid:2) Timing errors These occur in real-time systems that use a shared memory or a
message-passing interface. The producer of data and the consumer of data may

218 Chapter 8 (cid:2) Software testing
operate at different speeds. Unless particular care is taken in the interface design,
the consumer can access out-of-date information because the producer of the
information has not updated the shared interface information.
Testing for interface defects is difficult because some interface faults may only
manifest themselves under unusual conditions. For example, say an object imple-
ments a queue as a fixed-length data structure. A calling object may assume that the
queue is implemented as an infinite data structure and may not check for queue over-
flow when an item is entered. This condition can only be detected during testing by
designing test cases that force the queue to overflow and cause that overflow to cor-
rupt the object behavior in some detectable way.
A further problem may arise because of interactions between faults in different
modules or objects. Faults in one object may only be detected when some other object
behaves in an unexpected way. For example, an object may call another object to
receive some service and assume that the response is correct. If the called service is
faulty in some way, the returned value may be valid but incorrect. This is not immedi-
ately detected but only becomes obvious when some later computation goes wrong.
Some general guidelines for interface testing are:
1. Examine the code to be tested and explicitly list each call to an external compo-
nent. Design a set of tests in which the values of the parameters to the external
components are at the extreme ends of their ranges. These extreme values are
most likely to reveal interface inconsistencies.
2. Where pointers are passed across an interface, always test the interface with null
pointer parameters.
3. Where a component is called through a procedural interface, design tests that
deliberately cause the component to fail. Differing failure assumptions are one
of the most common specification misunderstandings.
4. Use stress testing in message passing systems. This means that you should
design tests that generate many more messages than are likely to occur in prac-
tice. This is an effective way of revealing timing problems.
5. Where several components interact through shared memory, design tests that
vary the order in which these components are activated. These tests may reveal
implicit assumptions made by the programmer about the order in which the
shared data is produced and consumed.
Inspections and reviews can sometimes be more cost effective than testing for
discovering interface errors. Inspections can concentrate on component interfaces
and questions about the assumed interface behavior asked during the inspection
process. A strongly typed language such as Java allows many interface errors to be
trapped by the compiler. Static analyzers (see Chapter 15) can detect a wide range
of interface errors.

8.1 (cid:2) Development testing 219
Incremental integration and testing
System testing involves integrating different components then testing the integrated system that you have created.
You should always use an incremental approach to integration and testing (i.e., you should integrate a component,
test the system, integrate another component, test again, and so on). This means that if problems occur, it is probably
due to interactions with the most recently integrated component.
Incremental integration and testing is fundamental to agile methods such as XP, where regression tests (see Section
8.2) are run every time a new increment is integrated.
http://www.SoftwareEngineering-9.com/Web/Testing/Integration.html
8.1.4 System testing
System testing during development involves integrating components to create a ver-
sion of the system and then testing the integrated system. System testing checks that
components are compatible, interact correctly and transfer the right data at the right
time across their interfaces. It obviously overlaps with component testing but there
are two important differences:
1. During system testing, reusable components that have been separately devel-
oped and off-the-shelf systems may be integrated with newly developed compo-
nents. The complete system is then tested.
2. Components developed by different team members or groups may be integrated
at this stage. System testing is a collective rather than an individual process. In
some companies, system testing may involve a separate testing team with no
involvement from designers and programmers.
When you integrate components to create a system, you get emergent behavior.
This means that some elements of system functionality only become obvious when
you put the components together. This may be planned emergent behavior, which
has to be tested. For example, you may integrate an authentication component with a
component that updates information. You then have a system feature that restricts
information updating to authorized users. Sometimes, however, the emergent
behavior is unplanned and unwanted. You have to develop tests that check that the
system is only doing what it is supposed to do.
Therefore system testing should focus on testing the interactions between the
components and objects that make up a system. You may also test reusable compo-
nents or systems to check that they work as expected when they are integrated with
new components. This interaction testing should discover those component bugs that
are only revealed when a component is used by other components in the system.
Interaction testing also helps find misunderstandings, made by component develop-
ers, about other components in the system.
Because of its focus on interactions, use case–based testing is an effective
approach to system testing. Typically, each use case is implemented by several com-
ponents or objects in the system. Testing the use case forces these interactions to

220 Chapter 8 (cid:2) Software testing
Weather
Information System
SatComms WeatherStation Commslink WeatherData
request(report)
acknowledge
reportWeather( )
acknowledge
get(summary) summarise( )
send(Report)
acknowledge
reply(report)
acknowledge
occur. If you have developed a sequence diagram to model the use case implementa-
Figure 8.8 Collect
tion, you can see the objects or components that are involved in the interaction.
weather data
sequencechart To illustrate this, I use an example from the wilderness weather station system
where the weather station is asked to report summarized weather data to a remote
computer. The use case for this is described in Figure 7.3 (see previous chapter).
Figure 8.8 (which is a copy of Figure 7.7) shows the sequence of operations in the
weather station when it responds to a request to collect data for the mapping system.
You can use this diagram to identify operations that will be tested and to help design
the test cases to execute the tests. Therefore, issuing a request for a report will result
in the execution of the following thread of methods:
SatComms:request→WeatherStation:reportWeather →Commslink:Get(summary)
→WeatherData:summarize
The sequence diagram helps you design the specific test cases that you need as it
shows what inputs are required and what outputs are created:
1. An input of a request for a report should have an associated acknowledgment.
A report should ultimately be returned from the request. During testing, you
should create summarized data that can be used to check that the report is
correctly organized.
2. An input request for a report to WeatherStation results in a summarized report
being generated. You can test this in isolation by creating raw data corre-
sponding to the summary that you have prepared for the test of SatComms and
checking that the WeatherStation object correctly produces this summary. This
raw data is also used to test the WeatherData object.

8.2 (cid:2) Test-driven development 221
Of course, I have simplified the sequence diagram in Figure 8.8so that it does not
show exceptions. A complete use case/scenario test must also take these into account
and ensure that objects correctly handle exceptions.
For most systems, it is difficult to know how much system testing is essential and
when you should to stop testing. Exhaustive testing, where every possible program
execution sequence is tested, is impossible. Testing, therefore, has to be based on a
subset of possible test cases. Ideally, software companies should have policies for
choosing this subset. These policies might be based on general testing policies, such
as a policy that all program statements should be executed at least once.
Alternatively, they may be based on experience of system usage and focus on testing
the features of the operational system. For example:
1. All system functions that are accessed through menus should be tested.
2. Combinations of functions (e.g., text formatting) that are accessed through the
same menu must be tested.
3. Where user input is provided, all functions must be tested with both correct and
incorrect input.
It is clear from experience with major software products such as word processors
or spreadsheets that similar guidelines are normally used during product testing.
When features of the software are used in isolation, they normally work. Problems
arise, as Whittaker (2002) explains, when combinations of less commonly used fea-
tures have not been tested together. He gives the example of how, in a commonly
used word processor, using footnotes with a multicolumn layout causes incorrect
layout of the text.
Automated system testing is usually more difficult than automated unit or compo-
nent testing. Automated unit testing relies on predicting the outputs then encoding
these predictions in a program. The prediction is then compared with the result.
However, the point of implementing a system may be to generate outputs that are
large or cannot be easily predicted. You may be able to examine an output and check
its credibility without necessarily being able to create it in advance.
8.2 Test-driven development
Test-driven development (TDD) is an approach to program development in which
you interleave testing and code development (Beck, 2002; Jeffries and Melnik,
2007). Essentially, you develop the code incrementally, along with a test for that
increment. You don’t move on to the next increment until the code that you have
developed passes its test. Test-driven development was introduced as part of agile
methods such as Extreme Programming. However, it can also be used in plan-driven
development processes.

222 Chapter 8 (cid:2) Software testing
Identify New Pass
Functionality
Implement
Fail
Write Test Run Test Functionality and
Refactor
Figure 8.9 Test-driven
development
The fundamental TDD process is shown in Figure 8.9. The steps in the process
are as follows:
1. You start by identifying the increment of functionality that is required. This
should normally be small and implementable in a few lines of code.
2. You write a test for this functionality and implement this as an automated test.
This means that the test can be executed and will report whether or not it has
passed or failed.
3. You then run the test, along with all other tests that have been implemented.
Initially, you have not implemented the functionality so the new test will fail.
This is deliberate as it shows that the test adds something to the test set.
4. You then implement the functionality and re-run the test. This may involve
refactoring existing code to improve it and add new code to what’s already there.
5. Once all tests run successfully, you move on to implementing the next chunk of
functionality.
An automated testing environment, such as the JUnit environment that supports
Java program testing (Massol and Husted, 2003), is essential for TDD. As the code
is developed in very small increments, you have to be able to run every test each time
that you add functionality or refactor the program. Therefore, the tests are embedded
in a separate program that runs the tests and invokes the system that is being tested.
Using this approach, it is possible to run hundreds of separate tests in a few seconds.
A strong argument for test-driven development is that it helps programmers clarify
their ideas of what a code segment is actually supposed to do. To write a test, you need
to understand what is intended, as this understanding makes it easier to write the
required code. Of course, if you have incomplete knowledge or understanding, then
test-driven development won’t help. If you don’t know enough to write the tests, you
won’t develop the required code. For example, if your computation involves division,
you should check that you are not dividing the numbers by zero. If you forget to write
a test for this, then the code to check will never be included in the program.
As well as better problem understanding, other benefits of test-driven develop-
ment are:
1. Code coverage In principle, every code segment that you write should have at
least one associated test. Therefore, you can be confident that all of the code in

8.2 (cid:2) Test-driven development 223
the system has actually been executed. Code is tested as it is written so defects
are discovered early in the development process.
2. Regression testingA test suite is developed incrementally as a program is devel-
oped. You can always run regression tests to check that changes to the program
have not introduced new bugs.
3. Simplified debuggingWhen a test fails, it should be obvious where the problem
lies. The newly written code needs to be checked and modified. You do not need
to use debugging tools to locate the problem. Reports of the use of test-driven
development suggest that it is hardly ever necessary to use an automated debug-
ger in test-driven development (Martin, 2007).
4. System documentationThe tests themselves act as a form of documentation that
describe what the code should be doing. Reading the tests can make it easier to
understand the code.
One of the most important benefits of test-driven development is that it reduces
the costs of regression testing. Regression testing involves running test sets that have
successfully executed after changes have been made to a system. The regression test
checks that these changes have not introduced new bugs into the system and that the
new code interacts as expected with the existing code. Regression testing is very
expensive and often impractical when a system is manually tested, as the costs in
time and effort are very high. In such situations, you have to try and choose the most
relevant tests to re-run and it is easy to miss important tests.
However, automated testing, which is fundamental to test-first development, dra-
matically reduces the costs of regression testing. Existing tests may be re-run
quickly and cheaply. After making a change to a system in test-first development, all
existing tests must run successfully before any further functionality is added. As a
programmer, you can be confident that the new functionality that you have added has
not caused or revealed problems with existing code.
Test-driven development is of most use in new software development where the
functionality is either implemented in new code or by using well-tested standard
libraries. If you are reusing large code components or legacy systems then you need
to write tests for these systems as a whole. Test-driven development may also be
ineffective with multi-threaded systems. The different threads may be interleaved at
different times in different test runs, and so may produce different results.
If you use test-driven development, you still need a system testing process to val-
idate the system; that is, to check that it meets the requirements of all of the system
stakeholders. System testing also tests performance, reliability, and checks that the
system does not do things that it shouldn’t do, such as produce unwanted outputs,
etc. Andrea (2007) suggests how testing tools can be extended to integrate some
aspects of system testing with TDD.
Test-driven development has proved to be a successful approach for small and
medium-sized projects. Generally, programmers who have adopted this approach are
happy with it and find it a more productive way to develop software (Jeffries and

224 Chapter 8 (cid:2) Software testing
Melnik, 2007). In some trials, it has been shown to lead to improved code quality; in
others, the results have been inconclusive. However, there is no evidence that TDD
leads to poorer quality code.
8.3 Release testing
Release testing is the process of testing a particular release of a system that is
intended for use outside of the development team. Normally, the system release is for
customers and users. In a complex project, however, the release could be for other
teams that are developing related systems. For software products, the release could
be for product management who then prepare it for sale.
There are two important distinctions between release testing and system testing
during the development process:
1. A separate team that has not been involved in the system development should be
responsible for release testing.
2. System testing by the development team should focus on discovering bugs in the
system (defect testing). The objective of release testing is to check that the system
meets its requirements and is good enough for external use (validation testing).
The primary goal of the release testing process is to convince the supplier of the
system that it is good enough for use. If so, it can be released as a product or deliv-
ered to the customer. Release testing, therefore, has to show that the system delivers
its specified functionality, performance, and dependability, and that it does not fail
during normal use. It should take into account all of the system requirements, not
just the requirements of the end-users of the system.
Release testing is usually a black-box testing process where tests are derived from
the system specification. The system is treated as a black box whose behavior can
only be determined by studying its inputs and the related outputs. Another name for
this is ‘functional testing’, so-called because the tester is only concerned with func-
tionality and not the implementation of the software.
8.3.1 Requirements-based testing
A general principle of good requirements engineering practice is that requirements
should be testable; that is, the requirement should be written so that a test can be
designed for that requirement. A tester can then check that the requirement has been
satisfied. Requirements-based testing, therefore, is a systematic approach to test case
design where you consider each requirement and derive a set of tests for it.
Requirements-based testing is validation rather than defect testing—you are trying
to demonstrate that the system has properly implemented its requirements.

8.3 (cid:2) Release testing 225
For example, consider related requirements for the MHC-PMS (introduced in
Chapter 1), which are concerned with checking for drug allergies:
If a patient is known to be allergic to any particular medication, then prescrip-
tion of that medication shall result in a warning message being issued to the
system user.
If a prescriber chooses to ignore an allergy warning, they shall provide a
reason why this has been ignored.
To check if these requirements have been satisfied, you may need to develop sev-
eral related tests:
1. Set up a patient record with no known allergies. Prescribe medication for aller-
gies that are known to exist. Check that a warning message is not issued by the
system.
2. Set up a patient record with a known allergy. Prescribe the medication to that the
patient is allergic to, and check that the warning is issued by the system.
3. Set up a patient record in which allergies to two or more drugs are recorded.
Prescribe both of these drugs separately and check that the correct warning for
each drug is issued.
4. Prescribe two drugs that the patient is allergic to. Check that two warnings are
correctly issued.
5. Prescribe a drug that issues a warning and overrule that warning. Check that the
system requires the user to provide information explaining why the warning was
overruled.
You can see from this that testing a requirement does not mean just writing a sin-
gle test. You normally have to write several tests to ensure that you have coverage of
the requirement. You should also maintain traceability records of your requirements-
based testing, which link the tests to the specific requirements that are being tested.
8.3.2 Scenario testing
Scenario testing is an approach to release testing where you devise typical scenarios
of use and use these to develop test cases for the system. A scenario is a story that
describes one way in which the system might be used. Scenarios should be realistic
and real system users should be able to relate to them. If you have used scenarios as
part of the requirements engineering process (described in Chapter 4), then you may
be able to reuse these as testing scenarios.
In a short paper on scenario testing, Kaner (2003) suggests that a scenario test
should be a narrative story that is credible and fairly complex. It should motivate
stakeholders; that is, they should relate to the scenario and believe that it is important

226 Chapter 8 (cid:2) Software testing
Kate is a nurse who specializes in mental health care. One of her responsibilities is to visit patients at home to
check that their treatment is effective and that they are not suffering from medication side effects.
On a day for home visits, Kate logs into the MHC-PMS and uses it to print her schedule of home visits for that
day, along with summary information about the patients to be visited. She requests that the records for these
patients be downloaded to her laptop. She is prompted for her key phrase to encrypt the records on the laptop.
One of the patients that she visits is Jim, who is being treated with medication for depression. Jim feels that
the medication is helping him but believes that it has the side effect of keeping him awake at night. Kate looks
up Jim’s record and is prompted for her key phrase to decrypt the record. She checks the drug prescribed and
queries its side effects. Sleeplessness is a known side effect so she notes the problem in Jim’s record and
suggests that he visits the clinic to have his medication changed. He agrees so Kate enters a prompt to call him
when she gets back to the clinic to make an appointment with a physician. She ends the consultation and the
system re-encrypts Jim’s record.
After, finishing her consultations, Kate returns to the clinic and uploads the records of patients visited to the
database. The system generates a call list for Kate of those patients who she has to contact for follow-up
information and make clinic appointments.
that the system passes the test. He also suggests that it should be easy to evaluate.
Figure 8.10 A usage
If there are problems with the system, then the release testing team should recognize
scenario for the
MHC-PMS them. As an example of a possible scenario from the MHC-PMS, Figure 8.10
describes one way that the system may be used on a home visit.
It tests a number of features of the MHC-PMS:
1. Authentication by logging on to the system.
2. Downloading and uploading of specified patient records to a laptop.
3. Home visit scheduling.
4. Encryption and decryption of patient records on a mobile device.
5. Record retrieval and modification.
6. Links with the drugs database that maintains side-effect information.
7. The system for call prompting.
If you are a release tester, you run through this scenario, playing the role of
Kate and observing how the system behaves in response to different inputs. As
‘Kate’, you may make deliberate mistakes, such as inputting the wrong key
phrase to decode records. This checks the response of the system to errors. You
should carefully note any problems that arise, including performance problems. If
a system is too slow, this will change the way that it is used. For example, if it
takes too long to encrypt a record, then users who are short of time may skip this
stage. If they then lose their laptop, an unauthorized person could then view the
patient records.
When you use a scenario-based approach, you are normally testing several require-
ments within the same scenario. Therefore, as well as checking individual requirements,
you are also checking that combinations of requirements do not cause problems.

8.3 (cid:2) Release testing 227
8.3.3 Performance testing
Once a system has been completely integrated, it is possible to test for emergent prop-
erties, such as performance and reliability. Performance tests have to be designed to
ensure that the system can process its intended load. This usually involves running a
series of tests where you increase the load until the system performance becomes
unacceptable.
As with other types of testing, performance testing is concerned both with
demonstrating that the system meets its requirements and discovering problems and
defects in the system. To test whether performance requirements are being
achieved, you may have to construct an operational profile. An operational profile
(see Chapter 15) is a set of tests that reflect the actual mix of work that will be han-
dled by the system. Therefore, if 90% of the transactions in a system are of type A;
5% of type B; and the remainder of types C, D, and E, then you have to design the
operational profile so that the vast majority of tests are of type A. Otherwise, you
will not get an accurate test of the operational performance of the system.
This approach, of course, is not necessarily the best approach for defect testing.
Experience has shown that an effective way to discover defects is to design tests
around the limits of the system. In performance testing, this means stressing the sys-
tem by making demands that are outside the design limits of the software. This is
known as ‘stress testing’. For example, say you are testing a transaction processing
system that is designed to process up to 300 transactions per second. You start by
testing this system with fewer than 300 transactions per second. You then gradually
increase the load on the system beyond 300 transactions per second until it is well
beyond the maximum design load of the system and the system fails. This type of
testing has two functions:
1. It tests the failure behavior of the system. Circumstances may arise through an
unexpected combination of events where the load placed on the system exceeds
the maximum anticipated load. In these circumstances, it is important that sys-
tem failure should not cause data corruption or unexpected loss of user services.
Stress testing checks that overloading the system causes it to ‘fail-soft’ rather
than collapse under its load.
2. It stresses the system and may cause defects to come to light that would not nor-
mally be discovered. Although it can be argued that these defects are unlikely to
cause system failures in normal usage, there may be unusual combinations of
normal circumstances that the stress testing replicates.
Stress testing is particularly relevant to distributed systems based on a network of
processors. These systems often exhibit severe degradation when they are heavily
loaded. The network becomes swamped with coordination data that the different
processes must exchange. The processes become slower and slower as they wait for
the required data from other processes. Stress testing helps you discover when the
degradation begins so that you can add checks to the system to reject transactions
beyond this point.

228 Chapter 8 (cid:2) Software testing
8.4 User testing
User or customer testing is a stage in the testing process in which users or customers
provide input and advice on system testing. This may involve formally testing a sys-
tem that has been commissioned from an external supplier, or could be an informal
process where users experiment with a new software product to see if they like it and
that it does what they need. User testing is essential, even when comprehensive sys-
tem and release testing have been carried out. The reason for this is that influences
from the user’s working environment have a major effect on the reliability, perfor-
mance, usability, and robustness of a system.
It is practically impossible for a system developer to replicate the system’s work-
ing environment, as tests in the developer’s environment are inevitably artificial. For
example, a system that is intended for use in a hospital is used in a clinical environ-
ment where other things are going on, such as patient emergencies, conversations
with relatives, etc. These all affect the use of a system, but developers cannot include
them in their testing environment.
In practice, there are three different types of user testing:
1. Alpha testing, where users of the software work with the development team to
test the software at the developer’s site.
2. Beta testing, where a release of the software is made available to users to allow
them to experiment and to raise problems that they discover with the system
developers.
3. Acceptance testing, where customers test a system to decide whether or not it is
ready to be accepted from the system developers and deployed in the customer
environment.
In alpha testing, users and developers work together to test a system as it is being
developed. This means that the users can identify problems and issues that are not
readily apparent to the development testing team. Developers can only really work
from the requirements but these often do not reflect other factors that affect the prac-
tical use of the software. Users can therefore provide information about practice that
helps with the design of more realistic tests.
Alpha testing is often used when developing software products that are sold as
shrink-wrapped systems. Users of these products may be willing to get involved in
the alpha testing process because this gives them early information about new sys-
tem features that they can exploit. It also reduces the risk that unanticipated changes
to the software will have disruptive effects on their business. However, alpha testing
may also be used when custom software is being developed. Agile methods, such as
XP, advocate user involvement in the development process and that users should
play a key role in designing tests for the system.
Beta testing takes place when an early, sometimes unfinished, release of a soft-
ware system is made available to customers and users for evaluation. Beta testers

|     |      |      |     | 8.4  | (cid:2) User testing 229 |
| --- | ---- | ---- | --- | ---- | ------------------------ |
|     | Test | Test |     | Test | Testing                  |
Tests
|        | Criteria | Plan   |     | Results | Report    |
| ------ | -------- | ------ | --- | ------- | --------- |
| Define | Plan     | Derive | Run |         | Accept or |
Negotiate
| Acceptance | Acceptance | Acceptance | Acceptance |     | Reject |
| ---------- | ---------- | ---------- | ---------- | --- | ------ |
Test Results
| Criteria | Testing | Tests | Tests |     | System |
| -------- | ------- | ----- | ----- | --- | ------ |
may be a selected group of customers who are early adopters of the system.
Figure 8.11 The
Alternatively, the software may be made publicly available for use by anyone who is
acceptance testing
process interested in it. Beta testing is mostly used for software products that are used in
many different environments (as opposed to custom systems which are generally
used in a defined environment). It is impossible for product developers to know and
replicate all the environments in which the software will be used. Beta testing is
therefore essential to discover interaction problems between the software and fea-
tures of the environment where it is used. Beta testing is also a form of marketing—
customers learn about their system and what it can do for them.
Acceptance testing is an inherent part of custom systems development. It takes
place after release testing. It involves a customer formally testing a system to decide
whether or not it should be accepted from the system developer. Acceptance implies
that payment should be made for the system.
There are six stages in the acceptance testing process, as shown in Figure 8.11.
They are:
|     | 1. Define acceptance criteria |     | This stage should, ideally, take place early in the |     |     |
| --- | ----------------------------- | --- | --------------------------------------------------- | --- | --- |
process before the contract for the system is signed. The acceptance criteria
should be part of the system contract and be agreed between the customer and
the developer. In practice, however, it can be difficult to define criteria so early
in the process. Detailed requirements may not be available and there may be sig-
nificant requirements change during the development process.
|     | 2. Plan acceptance testing |     | This involves deciding on the resources, time, and |     |     |
| --- | -------------------------- | --- | -------------------------------------------------- | --- | --- |
budget for acceptance testing and establishing a testing schedule. The accep-
tance test plan should also discuss the required coverage of the requirements and
the order in which system features are tested. It should define risks to the testing
process, such as system crashes and inadequate performance, and discuss how
these risks can be mitigated.
|     | 3. Derive acceptance tests |     | Once acceptance criteria have been established, tests |     |     |
| --- | -------------------------- | --- | ----------------------------------------------------- | --- | --- |
have to be designed to check whether or not a system is acceptable. Acceptance
tests should aim to test both the functional and non-functional characteristics
(e.g., performance) of the system. They should, ideally, provide complete cover-
age of the system requirements. In practice, it is difficult to establish completely
objective acceptance criteria. There is often scope for argument about whether
or not a test shows that a criterion has definitely been met.

230 Chapter 8 (cid:2) Software testing
4. Run acceptance tests The agreed acceptance tests are executed on the system.
Ideally, this should take place in the actual environment where the system will
be used, but this may be disruptive and impractical. Therefore, a user testing
environment may have to be set up to run these tests. It is difficult to automate
this process as part of the acceptance tests may involve testing the interactions
between end-users and the system. Some training of end-users may be required.
5. Negotiate test resultsIt is very unlikely that all of the defined acceptance tests will
pass and that there will be no problems with the system. If this is the case, then
acceptance testing is complete and the system can be handed over. More com-
monly, some problems will be discovered. In such cases, the developer and the
customer have to negotiate to decide if the system is good enough to be put into
use. They must also agree on the developer’s response to identified problems.
6. Reject/accept system This stage involves a meeting between the developers
and the customer to decide on whether or not the system should be accepted. If
the system is not good enough for use, then further development is required
tofix the identified problems. Once complete, the acceptance testing phase is
repeated.
In agile methods, such as XP, acceptance testing has a rather different meaning. In
principle, it shares the notion that users should decide whether or not the system is
acceptable. However, in XP, the user is part of the development team (i.e., he or she
is an alpha tester) and provides the system requirements in terms of user stories.
He or she is also responsible for defining the tests, which decide whether or not the
developed software supports the user story. The tests are automated and development
does not proceed until the story acceptance tests have passed. There is, therefore, no
separate acceptance testing activity.
As I have discussed in Chapter 3, one problem with user involvement is ensuring
that the user who is embedded in the development team is a ‘typical’ user with gen-
eral knowledge of how the system will be used. It can be difficult to find such a user,
and so the acceptance tests may actually not be a true reflection of practice.
Furthermore, the requirement for automated testing severely limits the flexibility of
testing interactive systems. For such systems, acceptance testing may require groups
of end-users to use the system as if it was part of their everyday work.
You might think that acceptance testing is a clear-cut contractual issue. If a sys-
tem does not pass its acceptance tests, then it should not be accepted and payment
should not be made. However, the reality is more complex. Customers want to use
the software as soon as they can because of the benefits of its immediate deploy-
ment. They may have bought new hardware, trained staff, and changed their
processes. They may be willing to accept the software, irrespective of problems,
because the costs of not using the software are greater than the costs of working
around the problems. Therefore, the outcome of negotiations may be conditional
acceptance of the system. The customer may accept the system so that deployment
can begin. The system provider agrees to repair urgent problems and deliver a new
version to the customer as quickly as possible.

Chapter 8 (cid:2) Further reading 231
KEY POINTS
(cid:2) Testing can only show the presence of errors in a program. It cannot demonstrate that there are
no remaining faults.
(cid:2) Development testing is the responsibility of the software development team. A separate team
should be responsible for testing a system before it is released to customers. In the user testing
process, customers or system users provide test data and check that tests are successful.
(cid:2) Development testing includes unit testing, in which you test individual objects and methods;
component testing, in which you test related groups of objects; and system testing, in which
you test partial or complete systems.
(cid:2) When testing software, you should try to ‘break’the software by using experience and guidelines
to choose types of test cases that have been effective in discovering defects in other systems.
(cid:2) Wherever possible, you should write automated tests. The tests are embedded in a program that
can be run every time a change is made to a system.
(cid:2) Test-first development is an approach to development where tests are written before the code to
be tested. Small code changes are made and the code is refactored until all tests execute
successfully.
(cid:2) Scenario testing is useful because it replicates the practical use of the system. It involves
inventing a typical usage scenario and using this to derive test cases.
(cid:2) Acceptance testing is a user testing process where the aim is to decide if the software is good
enough to be deployed and used in its operational environment.
FURTHER READING
‘How to design practical test cases’. A how-to article on test case design by an author from a
Japanese company that has a very good reputation for delivering software with very few faults.
(T. Yamaura, IEEE Software, 15(6), November 1998.) http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/52.730835.
How to Break Software: A Practical Guide to Testing. This is a practical, rather than theoretical, book
on software testing in which the author presents a set of experience-based guidelines on designing
tests that are likely to be effective in discovering system faults. (J. A. Whittaker, Addison-Wesley,
2002.)
‘Software Testing and Verification’. This special issue of the IBM Systems Journalincludes a number
of papers on testing, including a good general overview, papers on test metrics, and test
automation. (IBM Systems Journal, 41(1), January 2002.)
‘Test-driven development’. This special issue on test-driven development includes a good general
overview of TDD as well as experience papers on how TDD has been used for different types of
software. (IEEE Software, 24(3) May/June 2007.)

232 Chapter 8 (cid:2) Software testing
EXERCISES
8.1. Explain why it is not necessary for a program to be completely free of defects before it is
delivered to its customers.
8.2. Explain why testing can only detect the presence of errors, not their absence.
8.3. Some people argue that developers should not be involved in testing their own code but that
all testing should be the responsibility of a separate team. Give arguments for and against
testing by the developers themselves.
8.4. You have been asked to test a method called ‘catWhiteSpace’in a ‘Paragraph’object that,
within the paragraph, replaces sequences of blank characters with a single blank character.
Identify testing partitions for this example and derive a set of tests for the ‘catWhiteSpace’
method.
8.5. What is regression testing? Explain how the use of automated tests and a testing framework
such as JUnit simplifies regression testing.
8.6. The MHC-PMS is constructed by adapting an off-the-shelf information system. What do you
think are the differences between testing such a system and testing software that is
developed using an object-oriented language such as Java?
8.7. Write a scenario that could be used to help design tests for the wilderness weather station
system.
8.8. What do you understand by the term ‘stress testing’? Suggest how you might stress test the
MHC-PMS.
8.9. What are the benefits of involving users in release testing at an early stage in the testing
process? Are there disadvantages in user involvement?
8.10. A common approach to system testing is to test the system until the testing budget is
exhausted and then deliver the system to customers. Discuss the ethics of this approach
forsystems that are delivered to external customers.
REFERENCES
Andrea, J. (2007). ‘Envisioning the Next Generation of Functional Testing Tools’. IEEE Software, 24
(3), 58–65.
Beck, K. (2002). Test Driven Development: By Example. Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Bezier, B. (1990). Software Testing Techniques, 2nd edition. New York: Van Nostrand Rheinhold.
Boehm, B. W. (1979). ‘Software engineering; R & D Trends and defense needs.’In Research
Directions in Software Technology. Wegner, P. (ed.). Cambridge, Mass.: MITPress. 1–9.
Cusamano, M. and Selby, R. W. (1998). Microsoft Secrets. New York: Simon and Shuster.

Chapter 8 (cid:2) References 233
Dijkstra, E. W., Dahl, O. J. and Hoare, C. A. R. (1972). Structured Programming. London: Academic
Press.
Fagan, M. E. (1986). ‘Advances in Software Inspections’. IEEE Trans. on Software Eng., SE-12(7),
744–51.
Jeffries, R. and Melnik, G. (2007). ‘TDD: The Art of Fearless Programming’. IEEE Software, 24, 24–30.
Kaner, C. (2003). ‘The power of ‘What If . . .’and nine ways to fuel your imagination: Cem Kaner on
scenario testing’. Software Testing and Quality Engineering, 5(5), 16–22.
Lutz, R. R. (1993). ‘Analyzing Software Requirements Errors in Safety-Critical Embedded Systems’.
RE’93, San Diego, Calif.: IEEE.
Martin, R. C. (2007). ‘Professionalism and Test-Driven Development’. IEEE Software, 24(3), 32–6.
Massol, V. and Husted, T. (2003). JUnit in Action. Greenwich, Conn.: Manning Publications Co.
Prowell, S. J., Trammell, C. J., Linger, R. C. and Poore, J. H. (1999). Cleanroom Software Engineering:
Technology and Process. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
Whittaker, J. W. (2002). How to Break Software: A Practical Guide to Testing. Boston: Addison-
Wesley.